feat: release notes and changes for v0.10.0 (#806)
flybywiresim/docs: docs/release-notes/v0100.md

<link rel="stylesheet" href="../../stylesheets/toc-tables.css">

# Stable Release v0.10.0

*Introduction*

This release now includes these major features:

- [x] More robust ATSU implementation
- [x] Enhanced flight operations with flyPadOS 3 improvements to pushback system, payload management, QuickControls, GSX integration and more.
- [x] Seemless integration of Terrain on ND through SimBridge.

> - [x] Fully replaced default fuel system with properly simulated A320neo fuel system with crossfeed functionality, center tank transfers, and more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [x] Fully replaced the default fuel system with a properly simulated A320neo fuel system with cross-feed functionality, center tank transfers, and more.
```

> - [x] FMGC + FMS improvements including:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [x] FMGC + FMS improvements, including:
```

    - [x] Improved flight plan management and handling
    - [x] Fixed bugs with thrust reduction and acceleration altitude
    - [x] FMS NAVAID autotuning
    - and more!
- [x] FWC reports and simulates more warnings appropriately.
- [x] Hydraulics calculations and simulation improvements across the entire aircraft.

For a full release changelog - [see here](#changelog)

!!! tip "Recommended Settings"

>     Before your first flight please make sure to read our [Recommended Settings](../fbw-a32nx/settings.md) guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Before your first flight, please make sure to read our [Recommended Settings](../fbw-a32nx/settings.md) guide.
```

    **Navigraph Airframe**

>     The team at Navigraph have been kind enough to include our airframe as a selectable option on SimBrief. You no longer have to save our custom airframe to your account to use it. If we decide 
>     to make any changes it will be automatically updated in their system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The team at Navigraph have been kind enough to include our airframe as a selectable option on SimBrief. You no longer have to save our custom airframe to your account to use it. If we decide 
    to make any changes, it will be automatically updated in their system.
```

    - MSFS Built-in ATC and VFR maps are on limited support. [Guides Here](#)
    - [Discontinuities](../pilots-corner/advanced-guides/flight-planning/disco.md) may now appear in your flight plan — they are a feature and not a bug.
    - [Throttle calibration](../fbw-a32nx/feature-guides/flypados3/throttle-calibration.md) is **mandatory**.

!!! info ""
    Downloads available through our [installer](../fbw-a32nx/installation.md).

    Please see our [Support Guide](../fbw-a32nx/support/index.md) and [Reported Issues](../fbw-a32nx/support/reported-issues.md).

---

## Quick Links

|                       Feature Shortcuts                       |
|:-------------------------------------------------------------:|
|               [Autotuning (Change pending)](#)                |
|  [Air Conditioning Simulation](#air-conditioning-simulation)  |
|               [FMGC + FMS + FWC](#fmgc-fms-fwc)               |
|                   [Hydraulics](#hydraulics)                   |
|                     [MCDU + ND](#mcdu-nd)                     |
|                [Terrain on ND](#terrain-on-nd)                |

## Feature Details

### Autotuning

> Autotuning is a feature that automatically tunes the NAVAIDS on the A32NX. It works by using a database of available NAVAIDS in the area and selecting the appropriate ones based on the aircraft's 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Autotuning is a feature that automatically tunes the NAVAIDs on the A32NX. It works by using a database of available NAVAIDs in the area and selecting the appropriate ones based on the aircraft's 
```

> position and flight plan. The FMS will periodically scan for new NAVAIDS and automatically tune the appropriate radio receivers. Autotuning takes into account various factors such as signal 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
position and flight plan. The FMS will periodically scan for new NAVAIDs and automatically tune the appropriate radio receivers. Autotuning takes into account various factors such as signal 
```

> strength, distance, and accuracy to determine which NAVAIDS to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
strength, distance, and accuracy to determine, which NAVAIDs to use.
```

> When performing an approach, pilots can VOR and RNAV navaids to assist with navigation. If another navaid is manually tuned, we have implemented the appropriate warning messages which appear 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When performing an approach, pilots can VOR and RNAV NAVAIDs to assist with navigation. If another NAVAID is manually tuned, we have implemented the appropriate warning messages which appear 
```

in the scratchpad. Any specified navaid when deselected will trigger an alert on the SEL NAVAIDS page on the ND and will not be tuned automatically.

> NDBs will also be automatically tuned when an NDB based approach is active, and a warning message will appear if a specified NDB is deselected. The CRS field for the VORs will not be displayed 
> when a DME only navaid is tuned by ident.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NDBs will also be automatically tuned when an NDB based approach is active, and a warning message will appear if a specified NDB is deselected. The CRS field for the VORs will not be displayed 
when a DME only NAVAID is tuned by ident.
```

> Alternate control can be utilized via the RMP to enable backup tuning by selecting the NAV button. This will cause the RAD NAV page on the MCDU to go blank, and the FMGC will no longer tune any 
> navaids.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternate control can be utilized via the RMP to enable backup tuning by selecting the NAV button. This will cause the RAD NAV page on the MCDU to go blank, and the FMGC will no longer tune any NAVAIDs.
```

> The ILS frequency is automatically tuned for the departure runway and when the aircraft is within 250NM of the destination airport. Scratchpad warning messages will appear if the ILS or ILS CRS 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ILS frequency is automatically tuned for the departure runway and when the aircraft is within 250 NM of the destination airport. Scratchpad warning messages will appear if the ILS or ILS CRS 
```

are set to different values.

Overall, autotuning simplifies the navigation process for pilots and allows them to focus on other critical aspects of the flight. It is a valuable feature that improves the safety and efficiency of the aircraft.

### Air Conditioning Simulation

**WIP**

### flyPadOS 3 Updates

> The flyPadOS 3 (EFB) now has some improvements to various existing features as well as GSX integration for those users that utilize the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The flyPadOS 3 (EFB) now has some improvements to various existing features, as well as GSX integration for those users who utilize the application.
```

Notably, in conjunction with our flight model changes and payload, the EFB now features a revamped weight and balance system without drastically changing the user interface. We have retooled this 

> process code-wise allowing for more complex manipulation resulting in better performance. While our users will continue to enjoy customizing baggage and seating through the EFB, we now have better 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
process code-wise, allowing for more complex manipulation resulting in better performance. While our users will continue to enjoy customizing baggage and seating through the EFB, we now have better 
```

> support for mixed seating classes and staggered rows. Applied "on top" of our GSX integration this essentially means 3rd party programs can interact better with our aircraft and even set seating 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
support for mixed seating classes and staggered rows. Applied "on top" of our GSX integration, this essentially means 3rd party programs can interact better with our aircraft and even set seating 
```

layouts.

> GSX integration features supported include refueling, boarding, and cargo. While we have some limitations in place due to Asobo's model and animations we have done our best to make the experience 
> to sync GSX features through the EFB as seamless as possible. These limitations are most notable with utilizing the rear cargo door or passenger doors and require special toggles on our EFB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GSX integration features supported include refueling, boarding, and cargo. While we have some limitations in place due to Asobo's model and animations, we have done our best to make the experience 
to sync GSX features through the EFB as seamless as possible. These limitations are most notable with utilizing the rear cargo door or passenger doors, and require special toggles on our EFB.
```

You can read more about our GSX integration [here](../fbw-a32nx/feature-guides/gsxintegration/index.md).

QuickControls have been added to the EFB to allow for quick access to important features like EFB brightness, or controlling the SimBridge connection, instant boarding or instant ADIRS alignment.
See our documentation for more information: [Quick Controls Documentation](../fbw-a32nx/feature-guides/flypados3/index.md#quick-controls)

The EFB Pushback System can now be fully controlled via API and therefore mapped to hardware buttons or controllers. See our 
documentation for more information: [Pushback API](../fbw-a32nx/a32nx-api/a32nx-flightdeck-api.md#pushback-api)

> We also continue to improve and perfect on our translations for the EFB which would not be possible without the amazing support from our community. It also would not be possible without our great partners at Localazy who have provided us with a great platform to manage our translations. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also continue to improve and perfect on our translations for the EFB, which would not be possible without the amazing support from our community. It also would not be possible without our great partners at Localazy who have provided us with a great platform to manage our translations. 
```

!!! note ""
    We are always looking for more help with translations. You can find more information on how to do so through our documentation [here](../dev-corner/dev-guide/specific/flypad-translations.md).

    <figure markdown>
      [![localazy-mono-logo.svg](../dev-corner/assets/localazy-mono-logo.svg){ width="300" }](https://localazy.com/term/software-localization?utm_source=flybywiresim.
    com&utm_medium=sponsored-referral&utm_campaign=partnerships&utm_content=footer-logo)
    </figure>

### FMGC + FMS + FWC

We have been hard at work making some significant improvements to the aircraft's Flight Management and Guidance systems. 

> We've made changes to the PERF GO AROUND page layout to better reflect the Honeywell Release 3. Additionally, we have exposed minimums to the PFD through the BnrArinc when in CRZ or later and within 

Reviewer: Is BnrArinc  correct?

Author: Will get confirmation

Reviewer: Saw it like that in code as well, so probably correct.

> 200NM of the destination. Constraints for waypoints behind the aircraft have also been added. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
200 NM of the destination. Constraints for waypoints behind the aircraft have also been added. 
```

> The FMS now handles approach transitions hidden inside other transitions with Navigraph data, implementing FMS LS tuning lock below 700 feet on approach, and making ILS course and slope 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The FMS now handles approach transitions hidden inside other transitions with Navigraph data, implementing FMS LS tuning lock below 700 feet on approach, and making ILS course and slope 
```
Only changed the space to be non-breakable.

> available for database NAVAIDS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
available for database NAVAIDs.
```

systems coding for the RAT allows for both hydraulic or electrical RAT design.

The rudder mechanical assembly, yaw dampers, and trimmable physical assemblies are now simulated. The THS specifically has been designed to work with both mechanical and electrical control, 
providing users with a more realistic and engaging flying experience.

### MCDU + ND

We're excited to announce the latest update to our MCDU + ND software. The new SPECIF VOR/D UNAVAIL message ensures you'll always be notified of any 
unavailable navigation aids. We've also fixed issues with EFOB and FUEL PRED getting dashed out at TOD, and negative EFOB values on both the F-PLN and FLIGHT PLAN pages.

There are also new NAVAID and SELECTED NAVAIDS pages, and the re-implementation of the RADIO NAV. Many of these new features have already been detailed in the [Autotuning](#autotuning) section.

The ND display no longer draws the background when busses are not powered, fixing LOC deviation scaling, and improving the consistency of RNP <= 0.3 indications. 

We've also added a reset of flight plan and stored data on Database switch. 

### Terrain on ND

> Our terrain database is now finally on our Stable version rounding out our current SimBridge enabled features. With SimBridge enabled during flights pilots operating in regions with hazardous terrain 
> conditions now have additional situational awareness to help them navigate safely. This is all possible with the Terrain Awareness and Warning System which overlays the Terrain Awareness and 
> Display which overlays the terrain on to the ND. Read more through our guide below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our terrain database is now finally on our Stable version, rounding out our current SimBridge enabled features. With SimBridge enabled during flights, pilots operating in regions with hazardous terrain 
conditions now have additional situational awareness to help them navigate safely. This is all possible with the Terrain Awareness and Warning System, which overlays the Terrain Awareness and 
Display, which overlays the terrain on to the ND. Read more through our guide below.
```

<link rel="stylesheet" href="../../stylesheets/toc-tables.css">

# Stable Release v0.10.0

We're excited to bring a slew of new features and various improvements to established systems simulation on the A32NX. One of the latest features some of you may have been enjoying on our 

> development branch is Terrain on ND. Built into our SimBridge you can not have access to our external terrain database which is utilized by the A32NX in the simulator. We've got some improved 

Reviewer 2: The phrasing here doesn’t make sense.

Author: Ah I have rewrote this since -- missed this comment

<link rel="stylesheet" href="../../stylesheets/toc-tables.css">

# Stable Release v0.10.0

*Introduction*

This release now includes these major features:

- [x] More robust ATSU implementation
- [x] Enhanced flight operations with flyPadOS 3 improvements to pushback system, payload management, QuickControls, GSX integration and more.
- [x] Seamless integration of Terrain on ND through SimBridge.
- [x] Fully replaced default fuel system with properly simulated A320neo fuel system with crossfeed functionality, center tank transfers, and more.
- [x] FMGC + FMS improvements, including:
    - [x] Improved flight plan management and handling
    - [x] Fixed bugs with thrust reduction and acceleration altitude

>     - [x] FMS NAVAID autotuning and more!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - [x] Navaid selection and automatic tuning
```

> - [x] FWC reports and simulates more warnings appropriately.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [x] TakeOff Surveillance 1 functions in the FMGC and FWC.
- [x] FWC reports and simulates more warnings appropriately.
```

    - Terrain on ND 
    - MCDU Remote Display
    - External Printer
    - Local Files feature
    - Company Routes

    [SimBridge Guides Here](../simbridge/index.md){.md-button}

    - Custom Flight Management System
        - See the [Special Notes Section](../fbw-a32nx/feature-guides/cFMS.md#special-notes) on our custom FMS page for details on the topics below:
    - Weather is inoperable as we wait for Asobo implementations.
    - MSFS Built-in ATC and VFR maps are on limited support. [Guides Here](#)
    - [Discontinuities](../pilots-corner/advanced-guides/flight-planning/disco.md) may now appear in your flight plan — they are a feature and not a bug.
    - [Throttle calibration](../fbw-a32nx/feature-guides/flypados3/throttle-calibration.md) is **mandatory**.

!!! info ""
    Downloads available through our [installer](../fbw-a32nx/installation.md).

    Please see our [Support Guide](../fbw-a32nx/support/index.md) and [Reported Issues](../fbw-a32nx/support/reported-issues.md).

---

## Quick Links

|                       Feature Shortcuts                       |
|:-------------------------------------------------------------:|

> |               [Autotuning (Change pending)](#)                |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|               [Navaid Selection and Tuning (Change pending)](#)                |
```

|  [Air Conditioning Simulation](#air-conditioning-simulation)  |
|               [FMGC + FMS + FWC](#fmgc-fms-fwc)               |
|                   [Hydraulics](#hydraulics)                   |
|                     [MCDU + ND](#mcdu-nd)                     |
|                [Terrain on ND](#terrain-on-nd)                |

## Feature Details

> ### Autotuning

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Navaid Selection and Tuning
```

> Autotuning is a feature that automatically tunes the NAVAIDs on the A32NX. It works by using a database of available NAVAIDs in the area and selecting the appropriate ones based on the aircraft's 
> position and flight plan. The FMS will periodically scan for new NAVAIDS and automatically tune the appropriate radio receivers. Autotuning takes into account various factors such as signal 
> strength, distance, and accuracy to determine, which NAVAIDs to use.
> 
> When performing an approach, pilots can VOR and RNAV NAVAIDs to assist with navigation. If another NAVAID is manually tuned, we have implemented the appropriate warning messages which appear 
> in the scratchpad. Any specified navaid when deselected will trigger an alert on the SEL NAVAIDS page on the ND and will not be tuned automatically.
> 
> NDBs will also be automatically tuned when an NDB based approach is active, and a warning message will appear if a specified NDB is deselected. The CRS field for the VORs will not be displayed 
> when a DME only NAVAID is tuned by ident.
> 
> Alternate control can be utilized via the RMP to enable backup tuning by selecting the NAV button. This will cause the RAD NAV page on the MCDU to go blank, and the FMGC will no longer tune any NAVAIDs.
> 
> The ILS frequency is automatically tuned for the departure runway and when the aircraft is within 250 NM of the destination airport. Scratchpad warning messages will appear if the ILS or ILS CRS 
> are set to different values.
> 
> Overall, autotuning simplifies the navigation process for pilots and allows them to focus on other critical aspects of the flight. It is a valuable feature that improves the safety and efficiency of the aircraft.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The navaid selection function of the FMGC continuiously selects appropriate VHF navaids based on the aircraft position, navigation database, route and procedures to support it's own navigation function, and to assist the pilots. The selected VOR and NDB navaids are automatically tuned for display on the ND unless the pilot has manually selected navaids in those slots on the MCDU RAD NAV page. The currently selected navaids can be view on the SEL NAVAIDs page in the MCDU. Navaids can also be de-selected on this page to prevent their use by the FMGC; useful for example when a navaid is declared out of service by a NOTAM.

When performing an approach, the required navaids (VOR, NDB, or ILS/LOC) will be automatically selected. If the pilot has manually tuned a different navaid, a warning will appear to remind them that a different navaid is specified for the approach. A warning will also appear if the navaid has been de-selected, as it may not be permissible to continue with the approach.

The aircraft has a backup tuning mechanism in the event of dual FMGC failure; to utilise this press the NAV button on the RMP. In backup tuning mode the FMGCs are unable to tune any nav radios, and the NAV RAD page will become blank. The DME channel associated with the ILS is also no longer tuned. For external hardware users it is not possible to tune the nav radios while the FMGC is in control, but this is still possible in RMP backup tuning mode.

The ND and PFD indicate the tuning mode of the navaids displayed by way of an underlined M for navaids tuned manually through the MCDU RAD NAV page, an underlined R for navaids tuned by the RMP backup tuning mode, and no symbol for automatically tuned navaids.

Overall, navaid selection and automatic tuning simplifies the navigation process for pilots and allows them to focus on other critical aspects of the flight. It is a valuable feature that improves the safety and efficiency of the aircraft.
```

The EFB Pushback System can now be fully controlled via API and therefore mapped to hardware buttons or controllers. See our
documentation for more information: [Pushback API](../fbw-a32nx/a32nx-api/a32nx-flightdeck-api.md#pushback-api)

We also continue to improve and perfect on our translations for the EFB which would not be possible without the amazing support from our community. It also would not be possible without our great partners at Localazy who have provided us with a great platform to manage our translations.

!!! note ""
    We are always looking for more help with translations. You can find more information on how to do so through our documentation [here](../dev-corner/dev-guide/specific/flypad-translations.md).

    <figure markdown>
      [![localazy-mono-logo.svg](../dev-corner/assets/localazy-mono-logo.svg){ width="300" }](https://localazy.com/term/software-localization?utm_source=flybywiresim.
    com&utm_medium=sponsored-referral&utm_campaign=partnerships&utm_content=footer-logo)
    </figure>

### FMGC + FMS + FWC

We have been hard at work making some significant improvements to the aircraft's Flight Management and Guidance systems. 

> We've made changes to the PERF GO AROUND page layout to better reflect the Honeywell Release 3. Additionally, we have exposed minimums to the PFD through the BnrArinc when in CRZ or later and within 
> 200 NM of the destination. Constraints for waypoints behind the aircraft have also been added. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We've made changes to the PERF GO AROUND page layout to better reflect the Honeywell Release 3. Additionally, the minima (RADIO or BARO) logic has been improved and is now only available to other systems such as the PFD when in CRZ or later and within 
200 NM of the destination. Handling of constraints for display on the ND has been improved.
```

> The FMS now handles approach transitions hidden inside other transitions with Navigraph data, implementing FMS LS tuning lock below 700 feet on approach, and making ILS course and slope 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The FMS now has a workaround for approach transitions that are hidden hidden inside other transitions when using Navigraph data, the ILS tuning lock below 700 feet on approach, and making ILS course and slope 
```

available for database NAVAIDS.

> We are also now targeting a more modern version of the Flight Warning Computer, adding warnings for fuel low, flap lever not zero, ground spoiler not armed, and speed brake still out.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We are also now targeting a more modern version of the Flight Warning Computer. A few additional warnings have been added such as fuel low, flap lever not zero at high altitudes, ground spoiler not armed or still extended during approach, and all of the takeoff surveillance 1 warnings.
```

<link rel="stylesheet" href="../../stylesheets/toc-tables.css">

# Stable Release v0.10.0

![stable 0100 graphic](assets/0-10-0-m.png)

> We're excited to bring a slew of new features and various improvements in the A32NX. Terrain on ND is now available through our SimBridge, which allows sim pilots to have access to our external terrain database. We've got some improved visuals by way of interior and exterior lighting, as well as new UI elements in the flyPadOS. In the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're excited to bring a slew of new features and various improvements to the A32NX. Terrain on ND is now available through our SimBridge, which allows sim pilots to have access to our external terrain database. We've got some improved visuals by way of interior and exterior lighting, as well as new UI elements in the flyPadOS. In the 
```

spirit of our dedication to realistic simulation, we have updated and further tuned plenty of onboard systems to even better match realistic operation and functionality.

This release is the culmination of months of work by our team and contributors, and we're proud to release v0.10.0. Happy flying!

This release now includes these major features:

> - [x] More robust ATSU implementation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [x] More robust ATSU implementation.
```

- [x] Enhanced flight operations with flyPadOS 3 improvements to pushback system, payload management, QuickControls, GSX integration and more.
- [x] Seamless integration of Terrain on ND through SimBridge.
- [x] Fully replaced default fuel system with properly simulated A320neo fuel system with crossfeed functionality, center tank transfers, and more.
- [x] FMGC + FMS improvements, including:

>     - [x] Improved flight plan management and handling
>     - [x] Fixed bugs with thrust reduction and acceleration altitude
>     - [x] Navaid selection and automatic tuning

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [x] Improved flight plan management and handling.
    - [x] Fixed bugs with thrust reduction and acceleration altitude.
    - [x] Navaid selection and automatic tuning.
```

- [x] TakeOff Surveillance 1 functions in the FMGC and FWC.
- [x] FWC reports and simulates more warnings appropriately.
- [x] Hydraulics calculations and simulation improvements across the entire aircraft.
- [x] Working windshield wipers.

For a full release changelog - [see here](#changelog)

!!! tip "Recommended Settings"
    Before your first flight, please make sure to read our [Recommended Settings](../fbw-a32nx/settings.md) guide.

    **Navigraph Airframe**

    The team at Navigraph have been kind enough to include our airframe as a selectable option on SimBrief. You no longer have to save our custom airframe to your account to use it. If we decide 
    to make any changes, it will be automatically updated in their system.

    [Guide Here](../fbw-a32nx/feature-guides/simbrief.md#simbrief-airframe){.md-button}

!!! warning "Important User Experience Changes"

    Please note the following changes.

    SimBridge is now required to use the following features:

    - Terrain on ND 
    - MCDU Remote Display
    - External Printer
    - Local Files feature
    - Company Routes

    [SimBridge Guides Here](../simbridge/index.md){.md-button}

>     - Custom Flight Management System

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Custom Flight Management System.
```

>         - See the [Special Notes Section](../fbw-a32nx/feature-guides/cFMS.md#special-notes) on our custom FMS page for details on the topics below:

Reviewer: Is the colon intended on this line?

    - [Throttle calibration](../fbw-a32nx/feature-guides/flypados3/throttle-calibration.md) is **mandatory**.

!!! info ""
    Downloads available through our [installer](../fbw-a32nx/installation.md).

    Please see our [Support Guide](../fbw-a32nx/support/index.md) and [Reported Issues](../fbw-a32nx/support/reported-issues.md).

---

## Quick Links

|                      Feature Shortcuts                      |
|:-----------------------------------------------------------:|
| [Navaid Selection and Tuning](#navaid-selection-and-tuning) |
| [Air Conditioning Simulation](#air-conditioning-simulation) |
|                 [Fuel System](#fuel-system)                 |
|              [FMGC + FMS + FWC](#fmgc-fms-fwc)              |
|                  [Hydraulics](#hydraulics)                  |
|                    [MCDU + ND](#mcdu-nd)                    |
|               [Terrain on ND](#terrain-on-nd)               |
|               [Miscellaneous Changes](#misc)                |

## Feature Details

### Navaid Selection and Tuning

> The navaid selection function of the FMGC continuiously selects appropriate VHF navaids based on the aircraft position, navigation database, route and procedures to support it's own navigation function, and to assist the pilots. The selected VOR and NDB navaids are automatically tuned for display on the ND unless the pilot has manually selected navaids in those slots on the MCDU RAD NAV page. The currently selected navaids can be view on the SEL NAVAIDs page in the MCDU. Navaids can also be de-selected on this page to prevent their use by the FMGC; useful for example when a navaid is declared out of service by a NOTAM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The navaid selection function of the FMGC continuously selects appropriate VHF navaids based on the aircraft position, navigation database, route, and procedures to support its own navigation function, and to assist the pilots. The selected VOR and NDB navaids are automatically tuned for display on the ND, unless the pilot has manually selected navaids in those slots on the MCDU RAD NAV page. The currently selected navaids can be viewed on the SEL NAVAIDs page in the MCDU. Navaids can also be deselected on this page to prevent their use by the FMGC; useful for example when a navaid is declared out of service by a NOTAM.
```

> When performing an approach, the required navaids (VOR, NDB, or ILS/LOC) will be automatically selected. If the pilot has manually tuned a different navaid, a warning will appear to remind them that a different navaid is specified for the approach. A warning will also appear if the navaid has been de-selected, as it may not be permissible to continue with the approach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When performing an approach, the required navaids (VOR, NDB, or ILS/LOC) will be automatically selected. If the pilot has manually tuned a different navaid, a warning will appear to remind them that a different navaid is specified for the approach. A warning will also appear if the navaid has been deselected, as it may not be permissible to continue with the approach.
```

> The aircraft has a backup tuning mechanism in the event of dual FMGC failure; to utilise this press the NAV button on the RMP. In backup tuning mode the FMGCs are unable to tune any nav radios, and the NAV RAD page will become blank. The DME channel associated with the ILS is also no longer tuned. For external hardware users it is not possible to tune the nav radios while the FMGC is in control, but this is still possible in RMP backup tuning mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The aircraft has a backup tuning mechanism in the event of dual FMGC failure; to utilise this, press the NAV button on the RMP. In backup tuning mode, the FMGCs are unable to tune any nav radios, and the NAV RAD page will become blank. The DME channel associated with the ILS is also no longer tuned. For external hardware users, it is not possible to tune the nav radios while the FMGC is in control, but this is still possible in RMP backup tuning mode.
```

recirculated cabin air), the trim air system (where it gets mixed with hot air from the engines) and finally to the cabin, where it cools down or warms up your passengers! And of course, we’ve 
added all the systems that monitor and control this journey.

Did you know that we simulate heat loss through the aircraft wall, the effects of speed and altitude (has anyone heard of the Nusselt Number?), passenger body heat dissipation, and even air leakage due to flushing the toilet?

We’ve also unified our cabin air simulation, so all the above have a direct effect on both the cabin temperature and the cabin pressure.

### Fuel System

The previous fuel system architecture was mostly carried over from the default Asobo A320NEO - which unfortunately was modelled on the A320CEO fuel system architecture. We have completely reworked 
this system ensuring that in the A32NX is simulating the correct A320NEO functionality as well as implemented a few previously INOP features.

- Much of the current fuel system architecture was carried over from the default Asobo A320NEO. Asobo incorrectly put the A320CEO fuel system architecture into the A320NEO such that fuel burned 

>   directly from the center fuel tank. For the A320NEO, fuel is transferred from the center tank to the inner tanks from which it flows to the engines. This transfer takes place under certain 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  directly from the center fuel tank. For the A320NEO, fuel is transferred from the center tank to the inner tanks, from which it flows to the engines. This transfer takes place under certain 
```

>   conditions (fuel in the center tank and inner tank fuel level less than about 500kg lower than the respective inner tank fuel capacity.) Other changes to make the fuel system more realistic have 
>   been made as described in the Summary of Changes section.
> - The Mode Selector overhead pushbutton is now operative. It can be placed in either Automatic mode (the normal mode with no indication showing) or Manual mode (with MAN showing on the lighted pushbutton).
> - The center tank fuel pump pushbuttons on the overhead panel have been changed to control the center tank transfer valves as on the real A320NEO. The A320NEO has jet pumps to transfer fuel from 
>   the center tank to the inner tanks. These pumps are activated by suction created by the open valves rather than being traditional pumps that can be directly controlled by the flight crew.
> 
>     !!! info "Note: Center Tank Pushbuttons"
>         Until we have a new model, these pushbuttons will continue to be labeled on the overhead panel as center tank pump switches.
> 
> - Center tank fuel will now transfer to the inner tanks rather than being fed directly to the engines. 
>     - This transfer will take place automatically if both the Mode Sel switch and the center tank 
>     valve (labeled as center tank pump) pushbuttons are in the normal AUTO position when the inner tank fuel level reaches a level 500 kg less than the inner fuel tank capacity (i.e., the transfer 
>     starts for each inner tank when that tank fuel quantity is less than 5019 kg). 
>     - The transfer will stop when either there is no center tank fuel, or the respective inner tank is filled. The center tank fuel transfer valves will also close 5 minutes after reaching the 
>       center tank reaches the low fuel level (130 kg). Center tank fuel transfer to an inner tank can also be stopped by placing the respective center tank transfer valve pushbutton (labeled as 
>       center tank pump) in the OFF position.
> - When the Mode Sel switch is in manual mode, all center tank fuel transfer is controlled manually by the flight crew. Center tank transfer can be started to an inner tank by putting the respective center tank valve pushbutton (labeled as center tank pump) in the ON position.
> - The ECAM fuel page has been updated to show fuel quantity changes, correct valve positioning, and coloration for the added center to inner tank fuel transfers and crossfeeds
> - Removed the triggers for autostarting and autostopping engines, which is not supported by the A32NX. It also removes the fuel lines going directly from the engines back to the 
> inner tanks.
> - The trigger to close the outer to inner fuel transfer valves was changed from a below fuel quantity trigger to an above fuel quantity trigger for clarity and simplicity, so that the 
> condition of "true" rather than "false" will close the valves.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  conditions (fuel in the center tank and inner tank fuel level less than about 500 kg lower than the respective inner tank fuel capacity.) Other changes to make the fuel system more realistic have 
  been made as described in the Summary of Changes section.
- The Mode Selector overhead pushbutton is now operative. It can be placed in either Automatic mode (the normal mode with no indication showing) or Manual mode (with MAN showing on the lighted pushbutton).
- The center tank fuel pump pushbuttons on the overhead panel have been changed to control the center tank transfer valves as on the real A320NEO. The A320NEO has jet pumps to transfer fuel from 
  the center tank to the inner tanks. These pumps are activated by suction created by the open valves, rather than being traditional pumps that can be directly controlled by the flight crew.

    !!! info "Note: Center Tank Pushbuttons"
        Until we have a new model, these pushbuttons will continue to be labeled on the overhead panel as center tank pump switches.

- Center tank fuel will now transfer to the inner tanks rather than being fed directly to the engines. 
    - This transfer will take place automatically if both the Mode Sel switch and the center tank 
    valve (labeled as center tank pump) pushbuttons are in the normal AUTO position when the inner tank fuel level reaches a level 500 kg less than the inner fuel tank capacity (i.e., the transfer 
    starts for each inner tank when that tank fuel quantity is less than 5019 kg). 
    - The transfer will stop when either there is no center tank fuel, or the respective inner tank is filled. The center tank fuel transfer valves will also close 5 minutes after reaching the 
      center tank reaches the low fuel level (130 kg). Center tank fuel transfer to an inner tank can also be stopped by placing the respective center tank transfer valve pushbutton (labeled as 
      center tank pump) in the OFF position.
- When the Mode Sel switch is in manual mode, all center tank fuel transfer is controlled manually by the flight crew. Center tank transfer can be started to an inner tank by putting the respective center tank valve pushbutton (labeled as center tank pump) in the ON position.
- The ECAM fuel page has been updated to show fuel quantity changes, correct valve positioning, and coloration for the added center to inner tank fuel transfers and crossfeeds
- Removed the triggers for autostarting and autostopping engines, which are not supported by the A32NX. It also removes the fuel lines going directly from the engines back to the 
inner tanks.
- The trigger to close the outer to inner fuel transfer valves was changed from a below fuel quantity trigger to an above fuel quantity trigger for clarity and simplicity, so that the 
condition of "true" rather than "false" will close the valves.
```

### flyPadOS 3 Updates

> The flyPadOS 3 (EFB) now has some improvements to various existing features, as well as GSX integration for those users who utilize the application.
> 
> Notably, in conjunction with our flight model changes and payload, the EFB now features a revamped weight and balance system without drastically changing the user interface. We have retooled this
> process code-wise allowing for more complex manipulation resulting in better performance. While our users will continue to enjoy customizing baggage and seating through the EFB, we now have better
> support for mixed seating classes and staggered rows. Applied "on top" of our GSX integration this essentially means 3rd party programs can interact better with our aircraft and even set seating
> layouts.
> 
> GSX integration features supported include refueling, boarding, and cargo. While we have some limitations in place due to Asobo's model and animations we have done our best to make the experience
> to sync GSX features through the EFB as seamless as possible. These limitations are most notable with utilizing the rear cargo door or passenger doors and require special toggles on our EFB.
> 
> You can read more about our GSX integration [here](../fbw-a32nx/feature-guides/gsxintegration/index.md).
> 
> QuickControls have been added to the EFB to allow for quick access to important features like EFB brightness, or controlling the SimBridge connection, instant boarding or instant ADIRS alignment.
> See our documentation for more information: [Quick Controls Documentation](../fbw-a32nx/feature-guides/flypados3/index.md#quick-controls)
> 
> The EFB Pushback System can now be fully controlled via API and therefore mapped to hardware buttons or controllers. See our
> documentation for more information: [Pushback API](../fbw-a32nx/a32nx-api/a32nx-flightdeck-api.md#pushback-api)
> 
> We also continue to improve and perfect on our translations for the EFB which would not be possible without the amazing support from our community. It also would not be possible without our great partners at Localazy who have provided us with a great platform to manage our translations.
> 
> !!! note ""
>     We are always looking for more help with translations. You can find more information on how to do so through our documentation [here](../dev-corner/dev-guide/specific/flypad-translations.md).
> 
>     <figure markdown>
>       [![localazy-mono-logo.svg](../dev-corner/assets/localazy-mono-logo.svg){ width="300" }](https://localazy.com/term/software-localization?utm_source=flybywiresim.
>     com&utm_medium=sponsored-referral&utm_campaign=partnerships&utm_content=footer-logo)
>     </figure>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The flyPadOS 3 (EFB) now has some improvements to various existing features, as well as GSX integration, for those users who utilize the application.

Notably, in conjunction with our flight model changes and payload, the EFB now features a revamped weight and balance system, without drastically changing the user interface. We have retooled this
process code-wise, allowing for more complex manipulation, resulting in better performance. While our users will continue to enjoy customizing baggage and seating through the EFB, we now have better
support for mixed seating classes and staggered rows. Applied "on top" of our GSX integration, this essentially means 3rd party programs can interact better with our aircraft, and even set seating
layouts.

GSX integration features supported include refueling, boarding, and cargo. While we have some limitations in place due to Asobo's model and animations, we have done our best to make the experience
to sync GSX features through the EFB as seamless as possible. These limitations are most notable with utilizing the rear cargo door or passenger doors and require special toggles on our EFB.

You can read more about our GSX integration [here](../fbw-a32nx/feature-guides/gsxintegration/index.md).

QuickControls have been added to the EFB to allow for quick access to important features like EFB brightness, or controlling the SimBridge connection, instant boarding. or instant ADIRS alignment.
See our documentation for more information: [Quick Controls Documentation](../fbw-a32nx/feature-guides/flypados3/index.md#quick-controls)

The EFB Pushback System can now be fully controlled via API and therefore mapped to hardware buttons or controllers. See our
documentation for more information: [Pushback API](../fbw-a32nx/a32nx-api/a32nx-flightdeck-api.md#pushback-api)

We also continue to improve and perfect on our translations for the EFB, which would not be possible without the amazing support from our community. It also would not be possible without our great partners at Localazy who have provided us with a great platform to manage our translations.

!!! note ""
    We are always looking for more help with translations. You can find more information on how to do so through our documentation [here](../dev-corner/dev-guide/specific/flypad-translations.md).

    <figure markdown>
      [![localazy-mono-logo.svg](../dev-corner/assets/localazy-mono-logo.svg){ width="300" }](https://localazy.com/term/software-localization?utm_source=flybywiresim.
    com&utm_medium=sponsored-referral&utm_campaign=partnerships&utm_content=footer-logo)
    </figure>
```

### FMGC + FMS + FWC

> We have been hard at work making some significant improvements to the aircraft's Flight Management and Guidance systems. 
> 
> We've made changes to the PERF GO AROUND page layout to better reflect the Honeywell Release 3. Additionally, the minima (RADIO or BARO) logic has been improved and is now only available to other systems such as the PFD when in CRZ or later and within 
> 200 NM of the destination. Handling of constraints for display on the ND has been improved.
> 
> The FMS now has a workaround for approach transitions that are hidden hidden inside other transitions when using Navigraph data, the ILS tuning lock below 700 feet on approach, and making ILS course and slope 
> available for database NAVAIDS.
> 
> We are also now targeting a more modern version of the Flight Warning Computer. A few additional warnings have been added such as fuel low, flap lever not zero at high altitudes, ground spoiler not armed or still extended during approach, and all of the takeoff surveillance 1 warnings.
> 
> Minor bugs related to thrust reduction and acceleration altitude have been fixed.
> 
> ### Hydraulics
> 
> The latest update for the aircraft includes a comprehensive set of changes to the hydraulic system.
> 
> Priority valves are now simulated and might cause some high flow consumer to behave poorly in some circumstances, for example the gear or flaps/slats while the plane is in abnormal hydraulic situation.
> 
> A new temperature simulation was added, and allows the system to react realistically to various type of failures, including hydraulic elements that might fail in a chain reaction if you don't react quickly enough. For example, letting the PTU run on an empty green or yellow system might cause the healthy system to overheat, thus losing both green and yellow... Not ideal!
> 
> Small detail added is the yellow brake accumulator that has now its state randomly generated when starting a flight. In some rare cases you might start with an empty brake accumulator: be careful with your checklist!
> 
> RAT turbine has now a new realistic aerodynamic model, and the addition of the anti-stall valve system. This system reduce the load of the hydraulic pump when RAT speed is too low, preventing it from stalling at low approach speeds. A new electrical 1.6m diameter RAT is also available for bigger planes.
> 
> The complete rudder mechanical assembly, electrical control, hydraulic assembly, and hydraulic yaw dampers are now simulated. Trying to move the trim wheel without hydraulic power will only let you move it a tiny bit, as the tension of the control cables increases. A new electrical control THS has also been developped for bigger planes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have been hard at work making some significant improvements to the aircraft's Flight Management and Guidance systems. 

We've made changes to the PERF GO AROUND page layout to better reflect the Honeywell Release 3. Additionally, the minima (RADIO or BARO) logic has been improved and is now only available to other systems such as the PFD when in CRZ or later and within 
200 NM of the destination. Handling of constraints for display on the ND has been improved.

The FMS now has a workaround for approach transitions that are hidden inside other transitions when using Navigraph data, the ILS tuning lock below 700 feet on approach, and making ILS course and slope 
available for database NAVAIDS.

We are also now targeting a more modern version of the Flight Warning Computer. A few additional warnings have been added such as fuel low, flap lever not zero at high altitudes, ground spoiler not armed or still extended during approach, and all of the takeoff surveillance 1 warnings.

Minor bugs related to thrust reduction and acceleration altitude have been fixed.

### Hydraulics

The latest update for the aircraft includes a comprehensive set of changes to the hydraulic system.

Priority valves are now simulated and might cause some high flow consumer to behave poorly in some circumstances, for example, the gear or flaps/slats while the plane is in abnormal hydraulic situation.

A new temperature simulation was added, and allows the system to react realistically to various types of failures, including hydraulic elements that might fail in a chain reaction if you don't react quickly enough. For example, letting the PTU run on an empty green or yellow system might cause the healthy system to overheat, thus losing both green and yellow... Not ideal!

Small detail added is the yellow brake accumulator, that has now its state randomly generated when starting a flight. In some rare cases you might start with an empty brake accumulator: be careful with your checklist!

RAT turbine has now a new realistic aerodynamic model, and the addition of the anti-stall valve system. This system reduces the load of the hydraulic pump when RAT speed is too low, preventing it from stalling at low approach speeds. A new electrical 1.6 m diameter RAT is also available for bigger planes.

The complete rudder mechanical assembly, electrical control, hydraulic assembly, and hydraulic yaw dampers are now simulated. Trying to move the trim wheel without hydraulic power will only let you move it a tiny bit, as the tension of the control cables increases. A new electrical control THS has also been developped for bigger planes.
```

### MCDU + ND

> We're excited to announce the latest update to our MCDU + ND software. The new SPECIF VOR/D UNAVAIL message ensures you'll always be notified of any 
> unavailable navigation aids. We've also fixed issues with EFOB and FUEL PRED getting dashed out at TOD, and negative EFOB values on both the F-PLN and FLIGHT PLAN pages.
> 
> There are also new NAVAID and SELECTED NAVAIDS pages, and the re-implementation of the RADIO NAV. Many of these new features have already been detailed in the [Autotuning](#autotuning) section.
> 
> The ND display no longer draws the background when busses are not powered, fixing LOC deviation scaling, and improving the consistency of RNP <= 0.3 indications. 
> 
> We've also added a reset of flight plan and stored data on Database switch. 
> 
> ### Terrain on ND
> 
> Our terrain database is now finally on our Stable version, rounding out our current SimBridge enabled features. With SimBridge enabled during flights, pilots operating in regions with hazardous terrain 
> conditions now have additional situational awareness to help them navigate safely. This is all possible with the Terrain Awareness and Warning System, which overlays the Terrain Awareness and 
> Display, which overlays the terrain on to the ND. Read more through our guide below.
> 
> [Terrain on ND Guides](../simbridge/simbridge-feature-guides/terrain.md){.md-button}
> 
> ## Misc
> 
> ### Miscellaneous
> 
> Using the MSFS built-in flight planning via the MSFS World Map is still important for many users, although less realistic than using SimBrief or other planning tools. Therefore, we have improved 
> the import process to better handle the MSFS flight-plan data and allow for more accurate imported flight plans.
> 
> Read more in our [Flight Planning Guide](../fbw-a32nx/feature-guides/flight-planning.md).
> 
> To ensure that users are always using the latest version of our aircraft, we have added a version check and user notification to inform users if their version is some time behind the latest 
> released version. This will help us to ensure that users always have the latest features and bug fixes.
> 
> ### Interior / Exterior Lighting Overhaul
> 
> Pilots can now enjoy our fully redone interior and exterior lighting. We have ensured that the cockpit experience is even more representative of the real life A320neo with proper reflections and 
> ambient lighting. 
> 
> The interior now comes with ambient flood lights the correct temps and bulb characteristics where the integral lights that mimic real life wear. 
> 
> ![video-embed](https://www.youtube.com/embed/y1eLbAsK12g)
> 
> ### Windshield Wipers
> 
> We have added a new feature to the aircraft, windshield wipers! The wipers are controlled by the wiper selector on the overhead panel with three options - OFF, SLOW, and FAST. The wiper's 
> movements are not only animated but also affect the rain effects on the windshield.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're excited to announce the latest update to our MCDU + ND software. The new SPECIF VOR/D UNAVAIL message ensures that you'll always be notified of any 
unavailable navigation aids. We've also fixed issues with EFOB and FUEL PRED getting dashed out at TOD, and negative EFOB values on both the F-PLN and FLIGHT PLAN pages.

There are also new NAVAID and SELECTED NAVAIDS pages, and the reimplementation of the RADIO NAV. Many of these new features have already been detailed in the [Autotuning](#autotuning) section.

The ND display no longer draws the background when busses are not powered, fixing LOC deviation scaling, and improving the consistency of RNP <= 0.3 indications. 

We've also added a reset of flight plan and stored data on Database switch. 

### Terrain on ND

Our terrain database is now finally on our Stable version, rounding out our current SimBridge enabled features. With SimBridge enabled during flights, pilots operating in regions with hazardous terrain 
conditions now have additional situational awareness to help them navigate safely. This is all possible with the Terrain Awareness and Warning System, which overlays the Terrain Awareness and 
Display, which overlays the terrain on to the ND. Read more through our guide below.

[Terrain on ND Guides](../simbridge/simbridge-feature-guides/terrain.md){.md-button}

## Misc

### Miscellaneous

Using the MSFS built-in flight planning via the MSFS World Map is still important for many users, although less realistic than using SimBrief or other planning tools. Therefore, we have improved 
the import process to better handle the MSFS flight-plan data and allow for more accurate imported flight plans.

Read more in our [Flight Planning Guide](../fbw-a32nx/feature-guides/flight-planning.md).

To ensure that users are always using the latest version of our aircraft, we have added a version check and user notification to inform users if their version is some time behind the latest 
released version. This will help us to ensure that users always have the latest features and bug fixes.

### Interior / Exterior Lighting Overhaul

Pilots can now enjoy our fully redone interior and exterior lighting. We have ensured that the cockpit experience is even more representative of the real life A320neo with proper reflections and 
ambient lighting. 

The interior now comes with ambient flood lights the correct temps and bulb characteristics where the integral lights that mimic real life wear. 

![video-embed](https://www.youtube.com/embed/y1eLbAsK12g)

### Windshield Wipers

We have added a new feature to the aircraft, windshield wipers! The wipers are controlled by the wiper selector on the overhead panel with three options - OFF, SLOW, and FAST. The wiper's 
movements are not only animated but also affect the rain effects on the windshield.

```
